Okay. At the conclusion of my narrative, with a
phrase, quote, this officer possesses
outstanding potential to the Army, end quote. And
I know that that had some
impact on the general officer board that each of
those gentlemen went to because each one of them
told me after it's all over said they quoted that to
me and I didn't realize you thought that of me but I
was telling the truth. I was impressed with both
their capabilities and so expressed it and it was
part of their making general officer anyway. They
were outstanding and had outstanding
capabilities and If this country, I don't know
whether it's both active still or not, but if this
country ever goes to war where there'll be top
flight general officers, I'd be happy to serve
with either one of them, under either one of them. I
knew them as majors and lieutenant colonels, and
there's where you cut the boys away from the men
real quick. and both of them were outstanding men
in their jobs. Okay. Now, tell me why you switched
or how it came about that you switched from the 90th
Infantry Division to the commander, the CO, or the
401st Field Artillery. No.
Because I moved out of town, and I'll have to find
the dates on that. I moved out of town, and... Well,
that was back in 54.
So you left the 90th. I left the 90th, and all these
remarks happened after I went back to the 90th. I
had a lapse there. I moved out of town. That meant I
could no longer associate on these every Thursday
night or every Sunday drills. Where'd you go? As I
remember, I went to New Orleans working. I know I
did. I went to New Orleans. Got a job down there, and
I couldn't participate with them, so the next
thing to do was to put me in a holding group and get me
out of that active spot. And
I stayed there in the 90, I mean in the 4-1st
group.
And I remember there was a paper shuffle somewhere
that I got into to artillery corps, corps
artillery.
401st group. I was still in the 401st group. It has
some dates. I can run this thing.
From 1940...
Chronological speaking again now.
From 1947 to 19...
June 47
to September 48, I was commander of the 4th First
Field Artillery Group.
And then, in a shuffle of paper designations and
all, from September of 48 to June of 50, I was
commander of the 33rd Corps Artillery, which is
again a paper outfit. It was a headquarters,
purely and simply. enlisted people, no equipment
or anything. And then September 50 is when I joined
the division artillery as the 9th division
artillery as executive officer and then I stayed
with them until 54.
Well, let me find some orders here. That's what you
said before. Oh,
I'm running backwards.
Okay. Let me get like this.
53, I was in the group.
September of 53 I was in the group. Which group?
401st group. Oh, okay, so the 90th Infantry
Division went from 1950 to 1953 then? No.
In 54 I'm in the 401st group. 55
is when I went to the to the 90th Division
Artillery. As commanded. As commanded, that's
correct. And that's where I assumed command of it
on 28th of April, 55.
And I commanded it until retired and retired.
And you made general on the 20th of January, 1956.
I'll tell you that. I'll check that in just a
minute.
I'm looking for an order here, as
I'll have. effective 20th January, 56 is when I
made general. Here's a telegram from chief of
staff in Washington. Promotion, announcement
made of your promotion as a reserve commission
officer in the army and greater brigadier general
was assigned to the army reserve in the United
States effective 20th January, 56. And so that
was, I was commander of the of the 90th division
artillery at that time and uh And you remained the
commander until your retirement? Until my
retirement. General Rutter was the division
commander and he was the one, of course, that
recommended me for the job.
I was promoted as such. What were your feelings
when you were promoted, Bill? Very, very few
colonels ever become generals. Well, my feelings
were
I was numb that I had been recommended and would be
promoted to general and never dreamed of such a
promotion or a recognition.
I was overwhelmed when I realized the
responsibility of it. I'd been a freelancing
battalion commander, so to speak. And all I had to
do was look after my 400 and few people and do my job.
And that was fine. I was happy and all. But this
thing completely took me out of the category of a
small unit commander and gave me a very large unit.
And the responsibility, it took a month for it to
soak in on me and me realize that it was true that I'd
been promoted to a BG. And it's something that's
ultimate in professional Army. And I just...
pinch myself, figure out if it's sure enough it's
me. But then again, I felt it was very
easy to slide in and do the job because I've been
doing it for so long. It really didn't make any
difference except your... The more
responsibility and the more recognition you get.
I mean, I could call down to the Fourth Army as a
colonel and fuss all day on the telephone without
getting an answer, but if I was a brigadier
general, I got put in right on, ahead of everything
else, and I got an answer, period. You're a
different, you're a different status in the Army.
You're,
The very weight of what you say bears so much
influence. As a colonel, you go down to the
officer's club and get tight if you wanted to and
wheel on home, but you can't do that as a brigadier
general or any general officer. You've got to set
the pattern, and you've got to demonstrate and
live by it. You can't tell people how to live and not
live that way yourself. And so it changes your
perspective and
I
kept about my business and
assured General Rutter that he'd be proud of his
division artillery and
that's when I set my goals of setting up this combat
proficiency test to as a goal for each of my
battalions. And they knew it. I told them way ahead
of time, before I ever announced it, to give them
time to react to it. And frankly, if they didn't
want to do it, well, I'd get another commander.
Because that's what I had as my goal. And I knew
that, in all probability, I'd be retiring in 1962
at the end of my 30 years. And that's what I wanted to
do. And I set about doing it. We,
that combat proficiency test is set out on the
regulations and it's standard. It's like
passing one of your history courses in college.
You prepare for it, you work after it, and you've
got to train every soldier in his job and he has to be
proficient or the thing will break down. And like I
say, the second year we did it, Colonel Kokonos and
Colonel Butler's battalions passed it, the third
year, and I think it was, it was, uh, uh, Carnegie's
battalion out of San Antonio in the fourth year, it
was, uh, Saget's battalion there in Austin passed
it. That's the way I remember it. So of course,
after one's passed it, it's easy for them to pass
it. And so there again, the Kokonos passed it three
years, and Butler three years, and the third one
two years, and one year, which qualified that
division artillery to go in combat immediately.
And that's the ultimate of the reserve program is
to prepare The enlisted reserves are the reserves
to take over the responsibilities of the active
army and to join with the active army and as far as I
was concerned, to be as good as active army or
better. Which brings us to another point. In 1950,
the United States went to war against North Korea.
and you were not called back in. There were very few
reservists that were called back in. What were
your feelings toward that? That's their
business. If they needed a 9th Divardy, they'd
call us and they didn't need us. Did you want to go or
did you have any pro or con feelings? I had no
brothers one way or the other about it.
I was prepared. My battalion, my divarty was
prepared. And the decision on what units went and
what units didn't go was made in Army
headquarters. Had they wanted to call the 9th
Divarty and General Elder would have called me,
I'd have said, yes, sir, we're ready. Or I'd have
said, we'll be ready in 30 days or 60 days or
something. But I could have said, we're ready.
The Army didn't dip into the reserves that deep.
They took some National Guard units, but they
didn't take any reserve units as such. Okay. Now
during the time that you were the commanding
general, you must have had more blacks and women
join the reserves, did you? Or could you tell me,
could you address those two topics, blacks and
women in the reserve, and give me your feelings on
that? I think it... My feelings are that getting
back beyond the minority business, I think that we
ought to have universal military service,
period. Truman's idea. I don't know. Certainly my
idea, that we ought to have universal military
training, and every youngster coming along
should do two years, 18 months, one year,
whatever, the powers that be think would be an
adequate time to train him or her. Women included?
Women included. I don't believe in women in a
combat role, but there are supportive roles that
they can do immensely well.
One time in combat, for instance, I had this
infallibly driven home. My wife wrote to me every
day. My mother wrote to me once or twice a week. And
one time I didn't get the letters for two months.
And I figured that something damn bold got sunk or
something, you know, I didn't pay attention to it,
except I was busy. But I did miss my letters from my
wife and my mother. General Patton was down in some
outfit, one of his Third Army outfits, talking
with some of the soldiers, and the old man would do
that frequently. He'd get in a mess line with them
and just discuss problems, how they're getting
along, they're getting, are the officers taking
care of you, you get plenty of food, you're getting
a can of beer down the end, you're getting a little
mail. No, sir, General, I haven't had any mail in
three weeks or five or six weeks. And it panned out
most of his answers were he hadn't, they hadn't had
any mail in six or eight weeks. Well, General
Patton was of the the capabilities and the
seniority that he went to Paris, where the Comzee
communication zone headquarters is, was. And he
went in and asked about the mail, and of course they
couldn't give him an answer. The APO mail was all
being flown out to Orly Field. And he found that out
somehow. And he went out there, and my God, there
were hangar after hangar stacked full to the
ceiling of mail that hadn't been handled.
And he got to digging into it as a very senior
three-star general. And this shows the swife that
one of those people could take. He found out that
there were two battalions of black wax assigned to
handling mail. And instead of sorting and
shipping the mail out to the units, they were
playing around, crowding around all night and
sleeping all day. General Patton, when he found
that out, he went and saw it himself. He went to
Comzee Commander and relieved him, two-star
general. Sent him home as lieutenant colonel. He
sent home two brigadier generals. as lieutenant
colonels and it absolutely devastated their
careers. He moved those people out of there and
sent them home. Got a bunch of his tankers that were
on rest somewhere and up there and started to bail
out and I remember I got 58 letters at one time. Gee
whiz. These other generals just didn't know this
was going on? Didn't know it was going on and they
didn't get out of their office downtown or their
officer's club or something to go see about it. But
General Patton- Have they heard any complaints?
Well, the complaints hadn't gotten to them, I
guess. Let's just say it that way. Because the
general officer should have, he should have
picked it up first place. In the second place, it
shouldn't have ever happened. But they just
weren't doing their job. And General Patton, when
he picked it up out in his mess line somewhere, that
soldier hadn't gotten any letters for six or eight
weeks. Well, he went to see why. And because of his
tenacity and because of his seniority, he had the
rank to do it. And he did it. So
that was a good place to put female soldiers,
starting male out. because there's no combat
exposure there. There's no rigid duty and it has to
be done. It took, General Pattinson sent some of
his two, three battalions of his tankers back
there. Left his tanks under guards wherever they
were, sent them back there and they did it in a
couple weeks. Broke the backlog down and got it
operating. But that was a good place to put female
soldiers. Now you get some screams about they're
not doing soldier work and all but took soldiers to
do the job and they did relieve able-bodied men
soldiers to do the fighting uh I don't know what
percent I'm sure 20 or 25 percent of the army is is
overhead army around headquarters particularly
and I know you saw a a male able-bodied male that
could do combat being an air packing typewriter.
So female soldiers have a very definite place in
the Army. I wouldn't say combat because they're
not equipped for combat. They don't have the
physical capabilities for combat, but they do
have physical capabilities doing office work,
which is necessary, the administrative work, and
handling the mail, for instance. Okay, in the late
1940s and throughout the war in Korea, President
Truman integrated the army units and before this
time of course we had black units, we had white
units, and then he integrated this must have had
some effect on the reserves. Could you talk about
that? It had effect on reserves in that
there was a transition period. didn't bother me
because my philosophy is red, yellow, black, or
white, they're precious in his sight. Jesus loves
the little children of the world. There was a
Sunday school song that I learned 65 years ago.
Those words in it, and I can't ever remember
violating it.
There was some resentment. Surely there was some
resentment. But some of the white boys and the
black soldiers coming in. On
the other hand, the black soldiers that came in to
me, I warned and made my people treat them as
equals. And I say made in that I busted one sergeant
because he didn't do it. And that word gets around
fast. On the other hand... One sergeant in a
reserve unit? A white sergeant in a reserve unit.
On the other hand,
those were signs of times. The transition had to be
made. It was by executive order. And those, as far
as I was concerned, that was Army regulations,
which means law, and that was it. And we turned out
some mighty good black enlisted people, and I have
served with some high-quality black officers.
There's no
room for dissent
on that subject, and those that fight that problem
are just, they should know they're fighting a
losing battle. Yeah, okay. That's not the
American philosophy. They could as well say
they're against German heritage people or Polish
heritage people or Italian heritage people or
African heritage people. They're all the same to
me. And if a man will present himself as a soldier,
do his job, why? Red, yellow, black, or white, I
don't care. Now were there any, except for this
sergeant, when you were the commander, Except for
this one sergeant that you had to ever leave, were
there any problems besides that? Any little riots
or anything? No, no, no, no, no, no. I never saw any
real problems at all. And his was passive. His was
passive. I busted him because he wasn't doing his
job of training that man, period. And whether that
man's black, white, red or yellow, I didn't care.
But he wasn't doing his job of training that man.
And I didn't bust him for...
not integrating with the man. I bust him for not
doing his job. Okay. Now, when you think back on
your military career, going all the way up to
general, did you leave, I like your opinion of
this, did you leave your advancement to fate or to
luck or something or to your superiors, or did you
think that you yourself had some control over your
promotions? The only control I had ever had,
Terry, is doing my job. A long time ago, and I told
you this story initially of how an army just saying
never hurry, never worry, never volunteer for
nothing. That is to some degree true. The
volunteer part is the true part. The other is not
true. I told you the story of my friend that got out
of Leavenworth the same time I did. swapped my name
for his on an order going to Portugal and he is lost
because of that and I'm here today. I never once
asked for a job and I never once asked to get out of a
job. When I was given a job, I energetically and
tried enthusiastically to do that job and If you do
that, your superiors can't help but recognize it,
and time comes for them to make a recommendation
for promotion. They could recommend somebody
that did that job. So it seems to me like you left,
and I don't want to put words in your mouth, but it
seems to me that you left your advancement to your
superiors. Without a doubt. Every move I made, I
never asked to be transferred to any
organization. I certainly never asked to be
promoted. Well, most people who reach the
pinnacle of the military or any organization,
many would say that these people are ambitious.
Would you consider yourself ambitious?
Ambitious only to the sense that I was obsessed
with doing my job in an excellent manner. The Army
terminology is superior. You
think of excellence as being the pinnacle in your
teaching profession and college careers and all
this kind of business. Well, in the Army, you have
five categories, superior, excellent, very
satisfactory, satisfactory, and
unsatisfactory. So my goal, and I energetically
pursued it, of being superior, doing the best job
possible. And I've reiterated a half dozen
instances where my work was recognized and I
profited by it. I could see this, that you do your
job or you'll be recognized. Okay, is that the same
idea that you have toward being an engineer?
That's right. What about this idea? Here's
another idea I'd like you to answer or address
yourself to. You're not only a success as far as the
military, but you're a leader, a former owner of
your own company. Do you think that getting ahead
in the military, how people get ahead, how people
get promoted in the military, is similar or
different than how they do that in the business
world? I think it's very similar in that if you do
your job, your superiors are going to recognize
you. And if they gave you more responsibility,
you're carrying more load, it means they will
promote you up to a higher echelon of supervision.
Well, that means more pay. And after every one, I
was looking for more pay. I carried that
philosophy every day in my business. And I
commended and rewarded the job superintendents
that were making money. And that means running a
good job, doing their job. They're doing their job
better than the rest of them. And that's reading.
Two of them made top wages, and one of them made
mediocre wage, I mean average wage, and two of them
made subpar wages. Purely and simply,
recognition of their capabilities. I treated
them all alike, but when it comes to the paychecks,
it was a different story. Because one of them was
making more money for me, meaning I could pay him
more money. And that man, he was excelling. He was
doing a superior job. and the others were doing
average jobs. Let's talk for a few minutes about
leadership. We've touched on this throughout
these interviews, but we have never defined it so
far. Would you give me your definition of
leadership? Leadership. I think that's the
demonstrated quality of getting the job done by
virtue of other people doing it for you. you've got
to give them the leadership to get them to
accomplish their job. It's nothing more than the
bag of carrots out in front of the mule. And if you
can keep that mule pulling, why, you're gonna get
your job done. To me, leadership is having the
confidence in yourself that you can do that job. If
you're equipped with the technical knowledge and
you can demonstrate the
practical application of your technical
knowledge with your confidence and exuberance
over it, you can portray it ultimately to the
fellas doing the work. And you've got to work
through chains of command. You can't be riding
herd over every man. In the Ninth Divardy, I
changed commanders a lot. Purely and simply,
weeding out the mediocre, the average, or the
excellent ones to get superior ones. And I think my
judgment was borne out by General Kokonos and
General Butler as two of the four.
I think it... Well, what type of values should a
leader have? You mentioned values. You mentioned
one. You said self-confidence. What other values
should a leader have? Well, he's got to be
technically capable. Sure. He's got to know what
he's doing. Absolutely. And he's got to be right.
And above all, he's got to be honest. He's got to be
honest and not try to hoodwink anybody and he's got
to be the first man to say, I got, I was wrong on that
one. Let's don't let that happen again. It doesn't
uh- So he can admit mistakes. Huh? So he can admit
mistakes. You bet. He's got to admit a mistake. Uh,
the, the uh, proof of the pudding is don't make
them, but if you ever make one, be the first to admit
it before anybody else finds it out. And uh, all you
can do is just say, I gotta stump my toe on that and
let's don't do that no more. Then is the leader
flexible? I think he is. He makes up his mind to do a
certain thing at a certain time by all the
information he has at that time. And that's the
correct decision to make. And come back a week
later and the changes of information can change
his decision. He has to be flexible. If something
doesn't work, you gotta approach it from another
angle to get around to wherever you want to go and
the decision made today doesn't necessarily hold
a week from today because the situation's
changed. What about tolerance? You mentioned how
Patton just fired these people, demoted other
people, sent them back. Would you think that
Batten was a great leader? I think you've said that
during these interviews. I think he's an
outstanding leader. One of the superior leaders
in the Army. All
he did was get the commendation of every man that
hadn't gotten letters in six or eight weeks. The
proof of the pudding is that General Eisenhower
and ultimately the Secretary of War in those days
upheld it. and never questioned it. And those
gentlemen have veto power over anything you do.
Me moving from A to B, if it hadn't been
satisfactory all the way up the line, they could
have jerked my ass and sent me home quick. I'll tell
you one experience I had with this. What I mean by
it, it was a dear experience to me. We were in an a
little German town named Schmid. Just after we
went into Germany, there was a bombed out church,
typical Catholic church, where the apse or the
sanctuary is long and then the rectory up here and
the pope and all up here. And the whole back end,
meaning the apps of the pulpit, the cross and all
were blown out, bombed out, artillery got here or
something, I don't know. Anyway, the pews were in
the back of the church were dusty and full of snow,
but still usable. And the army had a system where
they had one chaplain that would have four or five
battalions to work in an area. They may have had 10
battalions in this area, and they had a
Protestant, a Catholic, and maybe a Jew rabbi. And
they worked around in these areas. And they would
come by or send their helper down and say, well, the
chaplain wants to come by Sunday morning at 7
o'clock, have church. And how about getting us a
place to have church? OK. and you found a place to
have church and you set the thing up and you put the
word out to the area units next to you on either side
and we could have church at such and such a
crossroads and you come bring your boys down. Any
of them want to go to church, they can. Well,
our group had a Catholic chaplain who was head of
the Jesuit school up here in Denver.
Joe something, I forget his name. He was an
educator.
And he's a good fella. He loved, he played poker
with us and he drank a little nip with us now and
then, you know, in the evening. And
I'm sure he was a devout Catholic.
Anyway, this Baptist preacher sent word to me that
he could hold service in our area at 7 o'clock, and
me find him a place. Well, I looked around, and the
little old town's caput, except the back end of
this church. And the pews were still there,
intact. And I told my communications sergeant to,
once they get the wire in, all they got to do is keep
it in, and that's a relatively minor chore. So they
got time on their hands. I said, sergeant, take
care. spare people down to the church and sweep all
the snow off and get the debris off of eight or ten of
those pews back here in the back end so we can have
church down there Sunday. And this was maybe
Wednesday or Thursday, I don't know. And he said,
all right, and he did. Well, this Catholic chapter
helped me either supper, I mean, supper Thursday
night or breakfast Friday morning. What you could
do down there at the church, I'm going to have
church service. But you can't do that. I said, oh,
what are you talking about, Chaplain? That's a
church house, and
Chaplain Jones is coming down here Sunday morning
at 7 o'clock to have church. So he told me to have a
place, and that's where we're going to have it. You
can't do that. I said, oh, get off and back now.
What's the problem? He said, well, that's
sanctified property. And I'm not a Catholic. I am a
Christian, and I don't draw the line between them.
We all try and get the same heaven. And I said, oh,
hell, you just sit on over there on that peach tree
and watch me. I'm busy. I got busy with something to
get away from him. But the point is, he went to the
army chaplain, who was another Catholic, and the
army chaplain sent word i couldn't do that and i
sent word back to him right down come down and
breakfast at six o'clock and we go to church seven
o'clock come come worship with us you know i was
kind but i was completely telling him go to hell and
he went back of course he blew up like a toad frog
poison toad frog he went back and wrote an order by
command of General Simpson, the Army commander,
that I would not do it. Now, somehow, I got the
premonition that SOB would do this. And I hadn't
gotten it by the time I went to bed Saturday night.
And I told my message center that I did not want to be
disturbed. And any messages came to me before 7
o'clock in the morning to hold them. a message
center is where any incoming messages go in and are
tallied in by time and signature just like a
registered mail is in our post office and so sure
enough it came in after after i went to bed i don't
know what time 11 12 o'clock at night came in my
message center chief just sat on it and he gave it to
me after church sunday morning and touted it to me
at church yeah i mean he wrote it all out so It would
have stood up. And of course, it had already been
done. And my chaplain wouldn't, that chaplain in
our group wouldn't speak to me for a month after
that. But what I'm getting down to
is can they do it? About a week later, General
Simpson, who was 9th Army Commander, came down in
my area. And I had my people keyed. defensively for
me, when any general officer came in the area,
they'd get hold of me. So I could go down there and
report to him, introduce yourself to him if you
didn't know him, ask him if you could be of any help
to him in service, invite him to have a cup of coffee
or something, you know. Greet him in the area, see
what he's looking for, and of course,
defensively, I was interested in what the hell he
was doing down there. So I could protect myself or
the battalion. And he came in the area and he saw a
mess line. He timed his time to arrive here so he
could get in this mess line. That's where those
people would go to find information at. So he stood
in the enlisted mess line? So he got in the enlisted
mess line. He borrowed a canteen and a mess kit from
a soldier and went through and got his meal and went
up and sat down on the rock and talked with the
soldiers. And of course, when I saw what was
happening, I reported to him while they were still
in this line. He said, now, kiddo, I appreciate you
coming down. And you're a busy man, I know. So you go
on about your business. I just want to get a meal
here. And I said, come on up to the office and
message them. No, I'd rather have a meal down here.
And I knew what Teddy was doing, but I didn't know
why. So I just faded out of the picture. But I put my
trusted communications sergeant right behind
him so he could gather all this information for me.
So I would know what was going on. He asked them
questions about their mail, about their food,
about how I was taking care of them as far as
medicine was concerned, were their PX rations
adequate, and all the things that soldiers have
close to their heart. and of course I got a positive
answer, affirmative answer on every one of them
and when he left he sent his aide for me
and thank him very much for his courtesy, extended
and for the fine meal that he had. He was glad to see
that my soldiers were eating so well. He
liked the looks of my battalion and Keep up the good
work and left. Well, this is a four-star general.
My communications sergeant told me after it all
over what questions he asked and all, like about
your mail and your PX supplies and where you're
comfortably housed and how the rain and all that
kind of thing. And I dare say it was all a reflection
of this chaplain business and having Christian
church in the back end of this Catholic church and
offended the Catholic chaplain. And they
reported me to him. And General Simpson came down
to find out, just like General Patton did. Sure.
And I got affirmative reports on every category,
so all he could do was say, you got a good battalion,
keep up the good work, boy. But if one of those
soldiers had cracked a damn foot of slop, or, no, I
haven't gotten any mail, or we're not getting none
of the cigarettes or something like that, well,
old Kidwell would have been gone home as a captain
and still be a captain. But I got the other report.
And so I... So leadership, then, has a heck of a lot
to do with satisfying the needs of your men.
Absolutely. Everything. Because if the men
aren't happy, they won't do their job. Right. If
you keep a man satisfied and he can see himself
accomplishing something, he'll do it. And that's
leadership. That's leadership to me. Okay, let's
say that, General, they called you and asked you to
come to A&M and said... Talk to these young
19-year-old corpsmen here and tell them how to
become a leader. How would you respond to that?
You've got to know your job. And you have to have the
capabilities of portraying that knowledge to
your men. And whether leadership is a God-given
right or whether it's developed or whether it's
accidental. Educators and psychologists will
have to determine that. I don't know. Probably a
blend of all of it. I think some people are more born
leaders than others. Then again, if a man has the
desire, he can equip himself to do the job. And by
demonstration, he can excel the others. And
that's where the cream rises to the top. If a man
wants to do his job, he can do it. But he's got to know
his job first. And he's got to be able to portray
that knowledge to his other people.